---
title: "Houston’s wastewater monitoring of SARS‑CoV‑2, influenza, RSV, and mpox for infectious disease surveillance"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-07-31-wbe
venue: "SIMB Annual Meeting"
date: 2023-07-31
location: "Minneapolis, MN, USA"
---

Wastewater-based epidemiology can effectively monitor disease outbreaks and community disease burden through the detection of pathogens shed into wastewater by infected individuals. Wastewater surveillance programs have been established worldwide to monitor SARS-CoV-2 and provide timely information for public health response. The City of Houston started monitoring its wastewater for SARS-CoV-2 in April 2020. Today, the wastewater monitoring system includes over 100 sampling sites, ranging from municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), lift stations, and facilities such as schools, nursing homes, shelters, and jails. Our results showed that SARS-CoV-2 loads in wastewater were strongly associated with COVID-19 clinic cases in the community at both WWTP and facilities levels, and wastewater surveillance can provide an early warning of COVID-related hospitalizations. Building on the success of the SARS-CoV-2 wastewater monitoring, additional targets, including influenza A and B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and mpox have been incorporated into routine monitoring. In this talk, I will describe the workflows used in the Houston Wastewater Epidemiology system, from sample collection to target detection and data analysis, and how public health officials use wastewater data. I will also discuss how we are optimizing our current workflows, including incorporating more targets and comparing the performance of different concentration methods for diverse pathogen targets.
